Paul, a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother,
 To Phile'mon our beloved fellow worker
Phlm 2 
and Ap'phia our sister and Archip'pus our fellow soldier, and the
church in your house:
Phlm 3 
 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Phlm 4 
 I thank my God always when I remember you in my prayers,
Phlm 5 
because I hear of your love and of the faith which you have toward the
Lord Jesus and all the saints,
Phlm 6 
and I pray that the sharing of your faith may promote the knowledge of
all the good that is ours in Christ.
Phlm 7 
For I have derived much joy and comfort from your love, my brother,
because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you.
Phlm 8 
 Accordingly, though I am bold enough in Christ to command you to do
what is required,
Phlm 9 
yet for love's sake I prefer to appeal to you -- I, Paul, an ambassador
and now a prisoner also for Christ Jesus --
Phlm 10 
I appeal to you for my child, Ones'imus, whose father I have become in
my imprisonment.
Phlm 11 
(Formerly he was useless to you, but now he is indeed useful to you and
to me.)
Phlm 12 
I am sending him back to you, sending my very heart.
Phlm 13 
I would have been glad to keep him with me, in order that he might
serve me on your behalf during my imprisonment for the gospel;
Phlm 14 
but I preferred to do nothing without your consent in order that your
goodness might not be by compulsion but of your own free will.
Phlm 15 
 Perhaps this is why he was parted from you for a while, that you
might have him back for ever,
Phlm 16 
no longer as a slave but more than a slave, as a beloved brother,
especially to me but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the
Lord.
Phlm 17 
So if you consider me your partner, receive him as you would receive me.
Phlm 18 
If he has wronged you at all, or owes you anything, charge that to my
account.
Phlm 19 
I, Paul, write this with my own hand, I will repay it -- to say nothing
of your owing me even your own self.
Phlm 20 
Yes, brother, I want some benefit from you in the Lord. Refresh my
heart in Christ.
Phlm 21 
 Confident of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do
even more than I say.
Phlm 22 
At the same time, prepare a guest room for me, for I am hoping through
your prayers to be granted to you.
Phlm 23 
 Ep'aphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends greetings to you,
Phlm 24 
and so do Mark, Aristar'chus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
Phlm 25 
 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
