There was a man living in Babylon whose name was Joakim.
Sus 2 
And he took a wife named Susanna, the daughter of Hilkiah, a very
beautiful woman and one who feared the Lord.
Sus 3 
Her parents were righteous, and had taught their daughter according to
the law of Moses.
Sus 4 
Joakim was very rich, and had a spacious garden adjoining his house;
and the Jews used to come to him because he was the most honored of
them all.
Sus 5 
 In that year two elders from the people were appointed as judges.
Concerning them the Lord had said: "Iniquity came forth from Babylon,
from elders who were judges, who were supposed to govern the people."
Sus 6 
These men were frequently at Joakim's house, and all who had suits at
law came to them.
Sus 7 
 When the people departed at noon, Susanna would go into her husband's
garden to walk.
Sus 8 
The two elders used to see her every day, going in and walking about,
and they began to desire her.
Sus 9 
And they perverted their minds and turned away their eyes from looking
to Heaven or remembering righteous judgments.
Sus 10 
Both were overwhelmed with passion for her, but they did not tell each
other of their distress,
Sus 11 
for they were ashamed to disclose their lustful desire to possess her.
Sus 12 
And they watched eagerly, day after day, to see her.
Sus 13 
 They said to each other, "Let us go home, for it is mealtime."
Sus 14 
And when they went out, they parted from each other. But turning back,
they met again; and when each pressed the other for the reason, they
confessed their lust. And then together they arranged for a time when
they could find her alone.
Sus 15 
 Once, while they were watching for an opportune day, she went in as
before with only two maids, and wished to bathe in the garden, for it
was very hot.
Sus 16 
And no one was there except the two elders, who had hid themselves and
were watching her.
Sus 17 
She said to her maids, "Bring me oil and ointments, and shut the garden
doors so that I may bathe."
Sus 18 
They did as she said, shut the garden doors, and went out by the side
doors to bring what they had been commanded; and they did not see the
elders, because they were hidden.
Sus 19 
 When the maids had gone out, the two elders rose and ran to her, and
said:
Sus 20 
"Look, the garden doors are shut, no one sees us, and we are in love
with you; so give your consent, and lie with us.
Sus 21 
If you refuse, we will testify against you that a young man was with
you, and this was why you sent your maids away."
Sus 22 
 Susanna sighed deeply, and said, "I am hemmed in on every side. For
if I do this thing, it is death for me; and if I do not, I shall not
escape your hands.
Sus 23 
I choose not to do it and to fall into your hands, rather than to sin
in the sight of the Lord."
Sus 24 
 Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and the two elders shouted
against her.
Sus 25 
And one of them ran and opened the garden doors.
Sus 26 
When the household servants heard the shouting in the garden, they
rushed in at the side door to see what had happened to her.
Sus 27 
And when the elders told their tale, the servants were greatly ashamed,
for nothing like this had ever been said about Susanna.
Sus 28 
 The next day, when the people gathered at the house of her husband
Joakim, the two elders came, full of their wicked plot to have Susanna
put to death.
Sus 29 
They said before the people, "Send for Susanna, the daughter of
Hilkiah, who is the wife of Joakim."
Sus 30 
So they sent for her. And she came, with her parents, her children, and
all her kindred.
Sus 31 
 Now Susanna was a woman of great refinement, and beautiful in
appearance.
Sus 32 
As she was veiled, the wicked men ordered her to be unveiled, that they
might feed upon her beauty.
Sus 33 
But her family and friends and all who saw her wept.
Sus 34 
 Then the two elders stood up in the midst of the people, and laid
their hands upon her head.
Sus 35 
And she, weeping, looked up toward heaven, for her heart trusted in the
Lord.
Sus 36 
The elders said, "As we were walking in the garden alone, this woman
came in with two maids, shut the garden doors, and dismissed the maids.
Sus 37 
Then a young man, who had been hidden, came to her and lay with her.
Sus 38 
We were in a corner of the garden, and when we saw this wickedness we
ran to them.
Sus 39 
We saw them embracing, but we could not hold the man, for he was too
strong for us, and he opened the doors and dashed out.
Sus 40 
So we seized this woman and asked her who the young man was, but she
would not tell us. These things we testify."
Sus 41 
 The assembly believed them, because they were elders of the people
and judges; and they condemned her to death.
Sus 42 
 Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and said, "O eternal God,
who dost discern what is secret, who art aware of all things before
they come to be,
Sus 43 
thou knowest that these men have borne false witness against me. And
now I am to die! Yet I have done none of the things that they have
wickedly invented against me!"
Sus 44 
 The Lord heard her cry.
Sus 45 
And as she was being led away to be put to death, God aroused the holy
spirit of a young lad named Daniel;
Sus 46 
and he cried with a loud voice, "I am innocent of the blood of this
woman."
Sus 47 
 All the people turned to him, and said, "What is this that you have
said?"
Sus 48 
Taking his stand in the midst of them, he said, "Are you such fools,
you sons of Israel? Have you condemned a daughter of Israel without
examination and without learning the facts?
Sus 49 
Return to the place of judgment. For these men have borne false witness
against her."
Sus 50 
 Then all the people returned in haste. And the elders said to him,
"Come, sit among us and inform us, for God has given you that right."
Sus 51 
And Daniel said to them, "Separate them far from each other, and I will
examine them."
Sus 52 
 When they were separated from each other, he summoned one of them and
said to him, "You old relic of wicked days, your sins have now come
home, which you have committed in the past,
Sus 53 
pronouncing unjust judgments, condemning the innocent and letting the
guilty go free, though the Lord said, `Do not put to death an innocent
and righteous person.'
Sus 54 
Now then, if you really saw her, tell me this: Under what tree did you
see them being intimate with each other?" He answered, "Under a mastic
tree."
Sus 55 
And Daniel said, "Very well! You have lied against your own head, for
the angel of God has received the sentence from God and will
immediately cut you in two."
Sus 56 
 Then he put him aside, and commanded them to bring the other. And he
said to him, "You offspring of Canaan and not of Judah, beauty has
deceived you and lust has perverted your heart.
Sus 57 
This is how you both have been dealing with the daughters of Israel,
and they were intimate with you through fear; but a daughter of Judah
would not endure your wickedness.
Sus 58 
Now then, tell me: Under what tree did you catch them being intimate
with each other?" He answered, "Under an evergreen oak."
Sus 59 
And Daniel said to him, "Very well! You also have lied against your own
head, for the angel of God is waiting with his sword to saw you in two,
that he may destroy you both."
Sus 60 
 Then all the assembly shouted loudly and blessed God, who saves those
who hope in him.
Sus 61 
And they rose against the two elders, for out of their own mouths
Daniel had convicted them of bearing false witness;
Sus 62 
and they did to them as they had wickedly planned to do to their
neighbor; acting in accordance with the law of Moses, they put them to
death. Thus innocent blood was saved that day.
Sus 63 
 And Hilkiah and his wife praised God for their daughter Susanna, and
so did Joakim her husband and all her kindred, because nothing shameful
was found in her.
Sus 64 
And from that day onward Daniel had a great reputation among the people.
